hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is ben greenfield he's a
new york times best-selling author and
legendary biohacker who was named
america's top personal trainer in 2008
and one of the world's top 100 most
influential people in fitness in 2013
and 2014. he's also the founder and ceo
of keon a former bodybuilder and an
endurance athlete who in a single year
completed the nine hardest spartan races
to top it all off he lives almost
completely off the grid in spokane
washington and he writes one of the most
incredible blogs around on health
fitness and nutrition now ben whenever i
have somebody on the show that knows a
lot about health and nutrition i always
want to talk about how can we at least
make a real attempt at living forever
forever forever it is interesting right
because we live in in a modern era in
which people seem to be pretty
infatuated with anti-aging technology or
or supplements or you know medications
that you know the headlines you know say
they promise to extend life at a nickel
a pop but what's interesting is that
people do not seem to be living much
longer yet
despite these efforts
it looks like on paper that we are
but what's primarily measured with life
expectancy
is how long you're going to live from
the time that you're born until the time
that you die and once you once you strip
out the variables that we have managed
to get a pretty good handle on
in our modern health era like like
reducing the amount of infant deaths and
early deaths and uh you know worldwide
epidemics you know in measles mumps
polio just just all these things you
know the bubonic plague everything that
would have wiped out children and babies
and then you begin to look at the amount
of time that we're living after say
social security age or retirement you
know kind of like that 65 to 67 is age
we're not living that much longer we
really aren't i mean the the past couple
centuries have not produced a
significant increase in lifespan
once you once you reduce or you
eliminate that that
children baby death component
so
i think that if you look at a lot of
these cultures
where we find a high portion of
centenarians people who are living a
disproportionately long period of time
these so-called blue zones right that
the the lowest hanging fruit must start
there
right we know that there are certain
characteristics that when you look at
like a venn diagram of of okinawa and
loma linda and acaria and sardinia and
and uh you know all these different
others there's a multitude of blue zones
now
we see things that that overlap over and
over again no smoking
wild plant intake legume intake which
throws a lot of westerners for a loop
because we hear you know plants are bad
and there's a whole paleo movement you
don't need beans and you avoid a lot of
these these plants natural built-in
defense mechanisms but
we we know that legumes and wild plants
in general induce a xeno-hormetic effect
that causes the body to bounce back even
stronger so do you think then so mesis
i've heard you talk about it and
certainly something that's been on my
radar for a while but just for the
people that are listening so hormesis
being the something bad for you in small
amounts gives a positive effect even
though many of the things yes that could
that could kill you exercise will kill
you if you do too much of it or at least
you'll get over training syndrome and
you know you can you can generate some
adrenal issues and some hypothalamic
issues and and you can do a number on
yourself with over exercises as many
people who have dug themselves into that
hole no it's horrible the same thing
with cold and cold thermogenesis right a
small cold shower every day is fantastic
for your nitric oxide and your fat
burning capacity and the conversion of
adipose tissue into metabolically active
tissue and your your vagus nerve tone
but if you were to do and this this is
how they stress out rodents in
laboratory models of stress if you were
to to plunge yourself into cold water
for an hour a day you would you would
die a horrible early death or just feel
feel really miserable uh the same thing
we said for heat right we know from
these finished studies that that saunas
induce longevity you know four to five
saunas for 20 to 30 minutes a week and
we see a
four to five year lifespan increase in
finnish men and
i i forget the percentage but it's
staggering it's like a 40 to 60 percent
decrease
in in alzheimer's and dementia just from
the sauna just from the sauna now there
are confounding variables right like
i've i've sauntered at the finnish men's
sauna society and and been in many of
these european countries in the sauna
you are i mean all sorts of things right
you're you're not drinking a lot of
alcohol you're not sitting in front of
the tv in a social situation you're
de-stressing there's a lot of
confounding variables that go above and
beyond the heat
but it seems pretty apparent that small
amounts of heat are good for you and
large amounts of course you could stay
in the sauna for two hours a day and
wind up mineral depleted and dehydrated
and again
yeah so so that's the idea of hormesis
that things that that are bad for you in
very large doses are good for you in
small doses with
probably calorie restriction and fasting
being one of the most powerful and
profound examples of that if you don't
eat you'll eventually die or again just
just have a miserable existence and be
libido-less and cold and hungry but if
you engage in certain periods of caloric
restriction or any type of modified fast
as a frequent part of your life you you
actually induce that hormetic effect of
fasting
so
we look at these blue zones and
and they're doing things like no smoking
wild plant intake legume intake a lot of
these hormesis things right the you know
iceland they have their babies sleep
outside in the cold and you know folks
are you know in switzerland you can you
can look at these swiss school children
going outside in the cold weather in
their underwear as a way to fight
against the flu
and then of course we see you know
moderate amounts of alcohol intake we
see
lots of time in social settings with
friends an emphasis on love life family
relationships i'm a bigger fan of before
you go after the i want to live forever
and have my head cryogenically frozen
and buy all the expensive injections and
supplements and creams and lotions and
you know do my my photobiomodulation and
my cryotherapy chambers to instead go
after
this low hanging fruit you can get
outside barefoot or climb trees or climb
rocks or you know go out and do a
spartan race and roll around in the
ground but that's that's that's known as
grounding and earthing and of course
there are modern corollaries to that
there are modern biohacks that allow you
to concentrate that there are grounding
and earthing pads i i sleep on a mat all
night that produces what is called a
pulsed electromagnetic field a pemf mat
and this this simulates exactly what i
get if i were to go outside in ground or
earth and it's useful if i've been
traveling and
it kind of matters i don't i've heard
about grounding but right it matters
because the earth emits a natural
magnetic field that is actually very
therapeutic to the human body but most
of us aren't camping outdoors or
sleeping outdoors and in a modern
post-industrial era walking outside
barefoot so we can charge our bodies
and enhance the health of our
mitochondria by using the natural
electrical frequencies that the earth
produces or that we can produce through
modern technologies so there are ways
around this
how else can you charge the body uh good
water and mineral intake right we know
that each of the cells is is in
basically like an aqueous solution that
needs minerals and needs water you can
put celtic sea salt and water there are
the difference between himalayan sea
salt and celtics or celtic salt
based on
on the spectral analysis that have been
done by a variety of companies on salts
at the top of the totem pole from the
data that i've seen is the celtic salt
you know it's kind of like a grayish
salt you can find it at most grocery
stores that's about the best when it
comes to salt himalayan tends to be
higher in iron and other metals
for men especially who are concerned
about you know men tend to be at a
higher risk for what's called
hemochromatosis or iron overload i used
to tell people you know kind of like
kind of like i used to use the the term
fruits and vegetables as one single word
and then you realize well fruit i mean
apples and pears are actually a very
good way to spike your blood sugar for a
long period of time
i don't want to vilify fructose because
i think you know fruit is nature's
dessert it's fine in small amounts and i
love small dark rich berries that have a
low glycemic index but i don't lump
fruits and vegetables into the same
category like i used to and no longer do
i tell people well have a good salt like
a himalayan salt or a celtic salt no i
actually i kind of think of those
differently now based on on the effect
the different salts have on the body but
the big picture is that i don't think
enough people based on soil depletion
based on on water being stripped of
minerals if you're if you're paying
attention to your health and filtering
your water and using reverse osmosis or
something like that you're not getting a
lot of minerals so there are there are
places you can purchase trace liquid
minerals you can buy celtic salt you can
buy
a very
they taste like seawater these solutions
called hypertonic solutions but you want
to stay very adequately hydrated and
have a lot of minerals and get outside
and charge the body with the earth and
finally you want to charge the body with
the other way that we can actually
we can actually affect our
electrochemical balance and that's near
and far infrared light which you can get
from sunlight or if you're if you're
into whole you know the whole modern
biohacking and technology movement there
are
there are now
it's almost like like an infatuation
with this thing called
photobiomodulation you go to these
anti-aging clinics and they have these
red light tables that you lay on and you
can buy them for your home but you you
you know there are infrared saunas right
but it's far infrared near infrared and
red light and when you combine
grounding or earthing or the use of of
pemf if you want a more advanced tactic
water good clean pure water with a high
amount of minerals and a lot of sun or
again if you're going to biohack it some
type of photobiomodulation panel or bed
or sauna you're well on your way to
optimizing mitochondrial health without
a lot of these fringe injections and
tactics and i would say that that's
closer to kind of
simulating what the blue zones might do
versus taking a deep dive into some of
the some of the more modern technologies
and supplements
before you've taken care of just the the
basics
that's really interesting and something
i'm going to play this back because so
much of that
i think is is
getting into mitochondrial health and
really thinking about that is something
that i want to be obsessive about just
from a
an energy uh perspective having the
energy to do the things that i want to
do absolutely and i'll tell you one
other very interesting thing that i
think confuses a lot of people when it
comes to the mitochondria and that's
this idea of antioxidants and the and
these are actually marketed and sold in
a lot of supplements including a lot of
you know so-called anti-aging or
longevity supplements right but the idea
with antioxidants is that i think a lot
of people take too many of them
not only has research shown that high
doses of vitamin c
and vitamin e actually blunt the
mitochondrial response to exercise when
you exercise you produce new satellite
cells and you get an increase in the
production of mitochondria mitochondrial
density as soon as you dump a bunch of
antioxidants into your body you're
quelling the body's natural hormetic
response to exercise you're actually
shutting down hormesis which is exactly
what you were going after by exercising
in the first place so by going out after
an exercise session and taking a bunch
of antioxidants or or even taking a you
know doing doing a cold soak or a cold
bath you're quelling the body's natural
inflammatory response that you actually
want to occur
now when it comes to the mitochondria
the same thing can be said the
mitochondria produce free radicals and
free radicals are bad right
well that's what we're led to believe
they're not free radicals are signaling
molecules free radicals are what are
released by your mitochondria to let all
the other mitochondria in that cell or
in that area of tissue know how much
energy to produce or not to produce you
need a certain amount of free radicals
to actually signal your body to know hey
i i need to shuttle more electrons
through the electron transport chain to
produce more atp
or i don't and when you completely quell
that free radical response you get
decreased mitochondrial activity
decreased cell to cell signaling and you
lose a lot of that hormetic response
that you're going after so the trick is
to find the sweet spot with antioxidants
preferably to get a lot of your
antioxidants from wild plant intake and
whole food intake so that similar to the
blue zones you're also getting that
hormetic effect of the wild plants and
then finally to be careful
pairing your antioxidant intake too
close to an exercise session so i'm a
huge fan of fasting after exercise not
only do you get a growth hormone
response and a testosterone response
that's greater than if you finish your
exercise session with the suck down you
know your your fructose your
multidextron your creatine you know
whatever else is in your shake
you instead fast for a couple hours
after exercise that also allows the body
to have to fight its own battle right
it's got to create a lot of its own
endogenous antioxidants it has to engage
in that free radical cell to cell
signaling has to create new mitochondria
or increase the health of the current
mitochondrial health has to repair and
recover and as soon as you try to do
everything you can
all the bio hacks and supplements you
can so that you recover as fast as
possible you actually quell a lot of
that response so it's it's very
interesting how there's there's kind of
like a sweet spot with a lot of these
things especially when you when you
combine hormesis and mitochondria and
exercise and wanting to live a long time
so speaking of exercise what is the um
the sweet spot i guess for if if you're
trying for longevity a healthy lifespan
um i'm guessing it isn't the ultra
endurance races
yeah what does it look like well
um
human beings are wired in a certain
sense to go out and slay dragons to
climb our own personal mount everest to
to get out and
and just to move right living in a
modern post-industrial
largely sedentary era
we no longer are scratching that itch
with our jobs unless you're lucky enough
to be a construction worker
or a painter or you know like my wife
out there you know bringing alfalfa to
the goats and the wheelbarrow and taking
care of the chickens and pulling weeds
out in the garden and just being out in
the sunshine lifting heavy rocks every
once in a while
or maybe you know you're you're a hunter
gatherer
if you don't fall into any of those
categories
you get to the end of the work day or or
start the beginning of the workday and
you do have this ancestral itch to move
and hence we now live in an era
of crossfit boxes and pop-up gyms and
quick done-for-you 45-minute super
brutal exercise sessions to replace what
would have normally just been our
day-to-day job a hundred years ago and
you know
up until very recently gyms
and exercise and beating up and
buffeting the body that was the realm of
athletes and gymnasts and and warriors
and knights and gladiators and it wasn't
something the average person really even
felt the pressure to do you know you
want to survive you want to get through
the day you know you you want to move
and this idea of intentionally starving
yourself for fasting and also
intentionally beating up the body with
exercise like this is a relatively new
phenomenon you know in an area where
we're sitting all day and surrounded by
food you know we've got to figure out a
way to kind of kind of fight that battle
right so we fast and we exercise
but
the idea with exercise is of course we
don't see
to
return and kick this horse to death not
many of the blue zones or longevity hot
spots engaging in formal exercise
sessions right they are moving lifting
heavy things every once in a while you
know occasionally sprinting or playing
game of soccer or tennis or you know if
you look at it in in terms of like an
ancestral context maybe running from a
lion
but you know we're we're not doing a lot
of those things now and so we need to to
go to the gym now what research has
shown is that you know to respond more
directly to your question about how much
more than 60 minutes of intense exercise
let's you know let's say like a crossfit
intensity once you see about 60 minutes
of that which sounds ridiculous but i
know a lot of people who are who are
literally pushing themselves with two a
days or or exercising hard more than 60
minutes a day you see a law of
diminishing returns and an increased
risk of mortality and in the same way
with aerobic exercise let's say moderate
aerobic exercise right where you're
pretty aware that you're exercising it's
not like you're out picking weeds in
your garden once you exceed about 90
minutes of that you also see an
increased risk of mortality a decreased
rate of return on your exercise and we
see things like a cardiomegaly like in
the enlarged left ventricle of the heart
we see increased risk for arterial
stiffness so it appears to be about 60
minutes of intense exercise and 90
minutes of aerobic exercise where you
definitely see a law of diminishing
returns
and so
what i recommend that people do
is a
you hack your environment so that you
are somehow trying to simulate
that
all day long low-level physical activity
type of scenario you get a standing
workstation you get a treadmill
workstation
you litter your office or your cubicle
with things that allow you to do short
movement spurts throughout the day such
as a kettlebell to stop and do some
kettlebell swings
or
jumping jacks or you know i even have a
hex bar in my office with some plates on
it where i can lift heavy things every
once in a while when i take a break so i
work hard for 25 minutes take five
minutes move change positions walk swing
kettlebell do a few pull ups lift the
hex bar a few times keep going you know
i wait to take all my phone calls until
the afternoon when i can go outside in
the sunshine and walk and take my phone
calls so you figure out a way to get
your body to be to engage in low level
physical activity during the entire day
the way i like to think of it is that
exercise should be an option when you've
finished your day not a necessity then
when you do exercise exercise with the
minimum effective dose of exercise
walking is one of my favorite modes of
exercise period because i can i can talk
on the phone while i'm doing it i can be
in the sunshine very low barrier to
entry i can do it when i'm sleep
deprived i can go see a city when i'm in
a city i can it can be functional if i'm
commuting
but walking speed particularly walking
at a slightly faster rate than what is
comfortable for you slightly faster than
your stroll rate and being kind of
cognizant of your walking speed as
you're walking like pushing yourself to
walk just a little bit faster than you
want to walk walking speed is correlated
with longevity as well
and i'll throw one other at you uh this
particular mode of exercise involves
cold exposure it involves hypoxia it
involves some amount of sensory
deprivation you know swimming just
swimming just swimming interesting that
you call that that's something
oh if you've uh you know this is one of
the favorite things i like to do in the
mornings when i travel is i'll get into
a pool at the hotel and i go under the
water i hold my breath i go under the
water back and forth when i need to come
up for a breath i come up for a breath
and i train myself how to control the
heart rate and it's even better if the
pool is a little bit cold right so
you're getting some of your cold therapy
and then as soon as i've recovered my
breath i go back under and it's peaceful
and you can't hear much other than the
little swish of your hands or the swish
of your feet your heart rates up you're
training your breath you're a little bit
cold and you're sensory deprived so you
almost get a very kind of meditative
feeling from it so swimming swimming
would be the one that's a very good one
um earlier you were you've mentioned a
couple times like everybody has their
own personal mount everest what is yours
given the crazy [__] that you do like
what is your personal mount everest
well
if for me it's no longer physical that's
interesting uh
because
i've been there and done that and and
you know i've done the the you know all
the spartan races and i've done 13
ironman triathlons in the navy seal
training down in encinitas and the
the death race up in vermont and you
know you get to a certain point where
you know where that combination of
physical activity and kind of the mind
[__] aspect that they throw in as
well whereas a lot of these events they
don't tell you what's coming next and
they want to beat you down and spit you
out you come out the other end a
stronger person
and it's made me incredibly resilient in
life not many things feel hard to me
anymore i've learned how to develop my
purpose and my why you know very
efficiently which is what gets you
through a lot of these events
but i think that one of the main reasons
that i personally sought out and did so
many of those things is
not only for the reasons that i already
elucidated which is
that modern post-industrial itch that we
have to just get out and move and come
back with a battle scar and get down in
the mud and you know be outside and and
even compete against others in the in
the so-called field of battle
but it's also because we really don't
see
uh rights of passage or coming-of-age
ceremony or a vision quest or anything
like that implemented with our youth
these days
so for me growing up as a young man and
never having that time when i officially
became a man
i think that a big part of my drive was
actually wanting to to prove that i'd
become a man my my twin boys river and
taran when they're 13 they will go
through a rite of passage
they're 10 right now so so they do a lot
of wilderness survival and you know i'm
training them to bow hunt and start
fires and plant forage and do everything
that would take to survive
on one's own in the wilderness then when
they're 13 they'll spend a week out in
by themselves by themselves together no
not together okay on their own when they
finish we'll have a you know like a a
cutting of the cord type of ceremony
they will most likely have their first
plant medicine experience where they're
we're all i'll expose them in a very
healthy way to to psilocybin or to
marijuana and i doubt that my kids are
going to come out of that experience and
feel like they need to go do an ironman
to to prove they're a man or something
like that so kind of a long answer i
didn't even answer your question yet
about what my own personal mount everest
is now
but for me
i i would say
it's the first time i've been asked that
question
and that there
are things that i really enjoyed to do
when i was a little boy
that i don't feel i fully utilized in my
adult life things that skills that i
know i was born with i think everyone is
born with a unique skill set
one of the best ways to to know what
your purpose is what your passion is is
to think about what you enjoyed to do
when you were young
i loved to
to read and to write i like to collect
and disseminate information and to teach
right i do that now with my podcast my
books and my blogs but i also absolutely
loved music
and i loved fantasy fiction when i was a
kid music and i played the violin and i
love to dance and sing and you know all
my family members have been in bands but
for me it's finishing my first five part
fiction series by the time i'm 50 years
old and also producing my first album
particularly in in the the country folk
realm i didn't see that answer coming um
i want to go back to this vision quest
that you're doing with your kids i think
that is extraordinary have you read
joseph campbell
uh
i i i'm very aware of the hero's journey
i haven't read his book when i read
joseph campbell probably in my early 20s
and he was talking lamenting that there
were no rites of passage that
he was saying that basically one of the
reasons he thinks the divorce rate is as
high as it is is when you go through
even a wedding ceremony has been really
stripped of any sort of real ritualistic
power
and after reading that i was like oh my
god like it really hit me hard and so i
said right when i get married i'm going
to be ritualistically scarred and my
ceremony because my wife is greek it was
this greek orthodox thing and it was
like all in a language that i didn't
understand and it was very formal and
there was waving of smoke and chanting
and all this stuff and i thought whoa
like it was so
intriguing it just really had my
attention so you couple that with then
the being
going through a very painful experience
that that left a permanent mark on my
body and i was like i'm a different
person the day after i got married than
i was the day before i got married but
it's really intriguing to me that you
said that even like the triathlons and
stuff if they could just ritualize it
right so
something something stark and profound
and memorable like that
could almost be
kind of kind of gimmicky or cheesy to
try to approximate you know with like a
triathlon or spartan or something of
those along those lines
but yeah i absolutely agree we're
missing that it's very interesting that
you bring that up with marriage i hadn't
heard it framed in that context before
but you're right if if marriage were
more liturgical or ritualistic we'd
probably see lower divorce rates and and
if if particularly and this might sound
stereotypical or sexist to say but
particularly if a man's coming of age
remarked by something hard because when
you think about it a woman
when she has her first period she kind
of does have that identifiable moment
when she has become a woman right that
that identifiable coming of age i don't
know that men go through something
similar in in terms of an actual
identifiable rite of passage you know if
we were circumcised in this day and age
many cases it was when we were very
small child or baby we don't remember it
at all so you can't really depend upon
that as being a market right of passage
but the other thing that i think about
is
is the fact that it could be okay and
this is just a thought experiment
to have multiple rites of passage as you
age to to to occasionally and i love
this idea it's really the only way i
stay fit is i always have something on
the calendar that scares me you know
from from a fitness or from a physical
standpoint like right now i'm supposed
to go up for a for a two week hunt for
grizzly and doll sheep and caribou in
the arctic circle and i plan on taking
no food with me that will be a bow hunt
i will rely upon fish and plant foraging
to get through that and that's not until
august of 2020 like it's going to be a
while before i go out and do that but
that means that during this upcoming
year 2019 i'll need to work on my arctic
survival skills i'll need to work on my
fire making skills i'll need to work on
my on my hunting and my fishing on my
plant forge identification for that
region of the world like there's a lot
that goes into preparing for something
really [__] clear you're gonna bow
hunt a grizzly bear yes
yes i am not opposed to people going out
and occasionally doing hard things like
that i just think we need to strike a
balance you know you know like you know
people feeling like they got to go out
do it you know an ironman triathlon
every month or something like that i you
know i think that that's
that's um this little excessive so
um ultimately though
uh yeah i mean i think that that a rite
of passage is something that it's never
too late to identify and go through and
that
it's it's something that a lot more a
lot more people should tap into
dude i want to talk more about your kids
the way that you raise your kids is
really fascinating to me so
you were talking about how you really
don't have rules at home
and that you were like if my kids want
to try a bit of scotch i can try scotch
i educate them about what it's doing to
their liver
that i'll be that sounds crazy yeah why
isn't that correct well it's there's
actually there's a book and and a series
of learnings on this called
love and logic that's the style of
parenting that this is and i'm no expert
on on that book or that curriculum per
se but the general idea is that rather
than
than barking orders at your children or
your babies or telling them them no
don't do that taking things away from
them having a host of forbidden fruit
from pornography to alcohol to drugs to
the freaking hot stove that they're not
supposed to touch you instead
teach them
the potential consequences of any
decision that they might make in life
and then allow them to make that
decision with very few exceptions to
that rule if your child is about to step
out in front of a train i mean for god's
sake tell them no shout at them grab
them and then pull them back you know
don't don't let them die but at the same
time there are certain decisions that i
think a child should be far more
equipped to make young in life so that
as they get older they're able to
responsibly handle those decisions my
first experience with alcohol was when
my my father's friend bought him a
really nice bottle of scotch and in our
house the children did not drink alcohol
alcohol was forbidden if the adults did
have wine or beer or anything like that
which was seldom you know the youth were
not allowed to go near it and touch it
so my first experience with alcohol was
stealing that bottle of scotch from my
father's desk and taking back to my room
and getting drunk so
i
think a far better approach is you know
at our house if we have some new fancy
bottle of wine that someone sent i'll
open it up and say oh smell this boys
this wine is fantastic you pour a little
bit of shot glass you swell it and you
see how that tastes in your mouth and
and you know they could spit it out they
swallowed it my children hate the taste
of wine and beer and alcohol but they
have a very healthy relationship with it
the same could be said for
for smartphones right there is no
there's no smartphone rule in our house
there's no you can't be on the phone for
x period of time or here here's your
minute allotment to be on the phone no
my kids can take the phone or their own
they have an itouch not a phone they can
be on that as much as they want but
they've been well educated about the
effect of wi-fi and bluetooth on on the
increasing
cell
neuronal division in their brain and the
effect that that can have on the sperm
cells if they like so many children and
adults do sit there with their phone and
in their lap you know they know i'm i'm
very very straightforward with my
children tell me you might you might
actually mess up your sperm and the
children that you have later in life
might be sick if you're holding your
cell phone with wi-fi on down by your
tiny growing gonads right and so i'm
very straightforward with them about
that and then they can go use the phone
whenever they want and they do go and
use the phone but when they use the
phone
they put it in airplane mode
they don't spend a lot of time on it
because it's not like this forbidden
thing that they you know
i got dad's phone and it's time to use
it as much as i can until it rips out of
my hand
if it's night they they go up to the
room they get a little blue light
blocking glasses and they have these
little like
anti-radiation pads on their laptop and
anti-radiation cases and they always
like pull those out and have those in
their laps or use those and you know
they know about blue light and their
sleep and i don't tell them go put your
blue light blockers on but i make an
example and i put them on myself and i
tell them why i'm wearing those at night
when i'm looking at screens
and you know the same could be said for
gluten right it's not like oh don't eat
the cupcakes don't eat the bread when
you go to the birthday party you have to
skip the cake i tell them well gluten
will affect your brain it can affect
your performance in school the next day
it can do some harm to your gut and you
know and i i buy them these gluten
digesting enzymes that they can take as
a supplement and then i just let them go
out and make the decision a lot of times
they'll go to the birthday party and
they'll come back and say dad those
cupcakes looked really good i didn't
want to have too much gluten so i had
about half of the cupcake and it was
really good or we'll go to the the
restaurant with the wonderful popovers
that they love to eat with the lavender
butter and they'll get their pop over to
make their pop over and then they'll
they'll pull out their gluten guardian
or their enzyme capsules you know their
dipeptido peptidase that's the name of
the chemical that'll actually digest
gluten and so they'll take their gluten
enzymes and do that but there's no root
they can eat all the bread on the table
and they know that but it's a
combination of
educating the children about the
consequences of the decisions that
they're going to make and then letting
them make the decisions and pairing that
with you being a very good example if
i'm not
wearing blue light blocking glasses when
i'm on screens at night and if i'm just
basically hoovering bread at the
restaurant and
i'm uh you know i'm not exercising and
then telling them hey boys you got to go
learn to do the kettlebells if they
don't see me in the garage doing turkish
get ups with the kettlebell the day
after i taught them how to do it and
told them it'd be really good for them
it really doesn't you know kids can see
right through that so so it's it's two
things it's the consequences and then
it's also being a good example
yeah so
listeners of my podcast know that i'm um
i'm intrigued by
uh micro dosing but i've never done it
but i've recently come into possession
of some psilocybin uh that i'm
really interested in trying
and you said that at 13 that maybe the
time that your kids first have a plant
medicine i think those are the words you
used right um
irresponsible
uh
a responsible plant medicine experience
overseen in the proper setting setting
right and what do you hope that they'll
take away from that what can i expect to
take away from that
well microdosing is different than than
dosing dosing with plant medicine you
know the merging of the left and right
brain hemispheres your ability to set
aside pre-existing values and beliefs
and notions and make yourself open
and embracing of new ideas new thought
patterns which allows you to make
business breakthroughs and personal
breakthroughs and leave emotional
baggage behind and develop better more
meaningful relationships with those
around you these are all things that you
would get from from dosing with these
things and more of what might be
considered a trip scenario and then
there's also the addiction component
people who are who are addicted to other
drugs such as you know whatever alcohol
heroin cocaine you name it
the use of psilocybin
or ibogaine is another very common one
has been successfully used to treat many
of these addictions but we're talking
about
overseeing trip doses where you're
you're you're not useful in any sense
usually you know flat out on your back
for hours and you know it's a very
different experience to something like a
micro dose but in the case of of a rite
of passage the reason to do something
like that would indeed be
after after a young man for example has
gone through something like that for
them to be able to dissolve the ego
you go i mean the best way i can
describe it when you use a medicine in
that way in a higher dose is that you go
completely blank slate and you just find
yourself on your back open to anything
that the world has to say to you at that
moment
i am a christian and i believe that that
god actually created a lot of these
plants to allow him to be able to speak
to us in a very deep and meaningful way
when the time comes problem is they're
used very hedonistically like a lot of
people are on their 38th ayahuasca trip
and i
before we talk about microdosing i
should name
that i am definitely a fan of a stoic
versus a hedonistic approach i think
anyone before they go out and do plant
medicine should go and and be in the
wilderness or go camping for for two
days or three days or five days and do
do a water fast out in the wilderness
without your cell phone and maybe a
journal and some kind of a spiritual
book and it's just you in nature i feel
a lot of people would quote find
themselves or get what they're looking
for as far as ego disillusion and a deep
spiritual experience if they were to go
that route stoically before they head
off to burning man with their friends to
do dmt or ayahuasca whatever i think
that in many cases it's overdone with
the proper set and setting
done done in the right scenario with the
right's intention
i think it can be
very powerful again for let's say in the
case of a young man dissolving the ego
and allowing them to venture forth into
the next chapter of their life as a new
person having almost kind of kind of
pushed the reboot button so to speak and
started the next chapter of life in a
very profound and meaningful way
now micro dosing
we're talking about far less
but it's still a perceptible
difference that you experience in your
cognition and
your relationships and even things like
sensory perception in the case of
something like psilocybin microdosing
with psilocybin
what you get is not only that merging of
the left and right hemispheres of the
brain but a little bit of that ego
dissolving effect and a little bit of a
sensory enhancement effect the veins on
leaves begin to stick out just a little
bit better flowers become brighter you
go outside and you feel the sunshine on
your skin a little bit more and plants
are brighter a lot of people like to do
things like use a microdose of
psilocybin and then before the day of
work begins go for a walk outside in the
sunshine to just kind of integrate
everything that you're feeling and then
you get back in and you just charge into
a day of work
your relationships feel better your
interpersonal communication improves uh
i find that you become more empathetic
to others feelings i use it for hunting
because you actually do get you know
it's i
i i it almost has like this turn you
into the ultimate predator type of
effect where you can smell better you
can see farther you can see tracks
better you can you can see trees and
plants and leaves better so it's useful
in that type of scenario as well and
yeah it's a very very pleasant
experience when you use these type of
things in the right format and
responsibly
yeah that's um i i i haven't done it
historically because i'm a wuss i want
to be very clear about why i haven't
done it not like oh i have some fear of
not being in control i have a real
like
pervasive fear in my life of brain
damage and so
things that mess with the brain really
just freak me out but i've heard so many
people talk about i mean like you just
did that there's a potential really
amazing impact of it what is the
craziest thing that you've tried
there there's a there's a lot of crazy
stuff but i guess the one i've probably
caught the most flak for was
last year men's health magazine had me
do like a three-month immersive
journalism story on everything a fella
could do to enhance his sexual
performance and testosterone so they had
me doing
gas station dick pills which essentially
turned out to be like a blend of
sildenafil and ephedra not any of the
ancient rare chinese herbs that they say
are in them
reduced ejaculation frequency where you
you have sex but you do like what's
called a power draw or you you put your
fingers down by your perineum
uh or or kind of kind of do like a kegel
squeeze down there power draw would be
very similar to what's taught in the but
the the multi-orgasmic man where you
breathe energy
from your from your crotch your lower
dantion up your spine up to your head so
you're drawing the energy just as you're
about to come
back up into your body like for real how
do you do that as you're learning how to
do that you're literally just breathing
and imagining the flow of energy coming
up the back of your spine over the top
of your head and back down and it sounds
strange but you can try this i mean if
you want to just try it on your own you
know you can you can masturbate and as
you're getting close you start to
breathe and draw it back up and you can
also take two fingers and put them on on
your perineum which is kind of the soft
area between your [__] and your balls
you just kind of put pressure there and
that can kind of keep you from
ejaculating and then you can practice
that and do it during sex it's called
reverse ejaculation it allows you to
orgasm without ejaculating but that was
one thing that they wanted me to
experiment with to to see what happened
with testosterone
all that you know is as a married man
who finds it difficult enough to step
away and make the time for sex and
you'll find alone time with my wife as
it is
being able to have sex and then not
ejaculating mostly just leaves you kind
of irritable and full of energy and
laying awake in bed at night wanting to
go bench press or hit the gym but but
you can't so i didn't i didn't like that
too much but it was interesting there
there was a platelet-rich plasma
injections where they draw plasma from
your body and they concentrate the
growth factors and then re-inject them
into your genitals they had me do
acoustic sound wave therapy they had me
do this therapy that they use in men
with erectile dysfunction where they
literally take the equivalent of like a
like a jackhammer wand and they wave it
around your genitals and it makes this
like a shaking sound like you have your
dick sandwich in between two giant
speakers and supposedly breaks open old
blood vessels and builds new blood
vessels and and i had to put numbing
cream on for that one too of course
and uh and and that protocol also seemed
to work as did the platelet-rich plasma
as did despite the sweaty palms and no
sleep the gas station dick pills like
like it all seemed to work to a certain
extent uh but the stem cells
to answer your question about one one of
kind of like the the craziest things
i've done i had the fat extracted from
my back via what is
essentially a liposuction procedure
which is a very common way to harvest
fat for stem cells and had it grown and
cultured using an enzymatic process to
isolate what are called the mscs the the
mesenchymal stem cells
a lot of people will do that and then
have those available as a systemic
injection for anti-aging literally
injecting the young you into the old you
which i did and i was able to subtract
17 years off my biological age based on
telomere measurements by doing just that
alone that's something you do like once
every five years or so whoa
so
bank it as early as you can i'm guessing
no you actually that's that is
a myth
that if you're 70 years old and you
can't bank your stem cells you're
screwed yeah now the stem cell theory of
aging is based on the fact that you tend
to lose your endogenous availability of
stem cells as you age but that doesn't
seem to accelerate aging and it appears
that when you inject stem cells what's
happening is the stem cells are calling
on your own stem cells your own growth
factors your own signaling molecules and
up regulating your body's own built-in
ability to be able to repair itself
which means that it doesn't matter how
old the stem cells are that you inject
because your body isn't using the stem
cells that you are injecting to do the
repair as much as it's using those to
amp up the communication availability of
the rest of the body so if you're 70
years old and you harvested your stem
cells and you had those injected you'd
still see a pretty good effect still see
a good effect measured in the length of
telomeres right well the length of
telomeres or joint health or anything
like that so that's yeah
in the case of like a like a like a
genital injection uh same thing that
they're they're acting to call in the
body's own growth factors to that area
to bring new vascularization new
capillary delivery
and so as as part of that protocol what
i did was i underwent full body sedation
i had the bone marrow extracted from my
hips
along with my own fat stem cells along
with things called exosomes along with
this platelet-rich plasma derived from
my own blood and i had my toes ankles
knees hips penis three times all up the
spine face hair everything done with
stem cells at a clinic in in salt lake
city utah so it's called a full body
stem cell
makeover and
and of all the things i did for that
men's health article in terms of sexual
enhancement the one that i noticed the
most as far as
you know just making you feel like a 16
year old boy you wake up every morning
with morning wood and your libido is
high
and just
everything works you know perfectly was
that stem cell protocol but that was
also the one that i i caught the most
flak for in terms of you know the
article and some follow-up stories that
you know some
some french magazine pulled the story
and and their their headline was man
with small dick attempts
larger and then i turned into a couple
u.s
websites picked that up and so all of a
sudden you know man attempts to make
dick bigger with stem cells and then one
of the photos on on one of the websites
was me in my kitchen holding a needle
which was not stem cells it was like a
peptide injection or something like that
but i found the photo so now it looks
like i've injected my own dick with stem
cells i'm just a complete cowboy
so anyways though it was in a medical
setting i found it profoundly helpful
my wife was so impressed with things
like the length of my orgasms improving
firmness hardness everything she went
she she did her her her clitoris and
vagina with stem cells so she did the
same protocol banked her stem cells so
she could do as i'm doing and do repeat
injections like every five years for the
anti-aging effect
but ultimately that
to answer your question that was
probably one of the crazier things i did
was the stem cells into the dick
that is amazing what other effects did
you notice if any recovery huge
significantly increased recovery post
workout meaning you know i have friends
who use testosterone who say it's almost
it's weird like you gotta be careful not
to get injured because you just get out
of bed the next day and you're just
ready for the next workout i noticed
very similar effects with stem cells to
where your body just repairs itself
far more quickly after the workouts that
was one big one
um
my face a lot of people said that after
the after the micro needling procedure
they thought my face looked younger like
less less wrinkles um
you know so so there so there's appears
to be a pretty good effect on collagen
or skin or wrinkles
um the big one though was just repair
and recovery you know i've done a lot of
[__] and just just
melting away a lot of the aches and
pains and joints though that was what i
appreciated a lot um you know i still
get injured knock on wood but it's uh
it it just it subsides a lot faster you
know
i i clear things up from an inflammatory
standpoint a lot faster
well dude
doing all that experimentation uh from
the rest of us thank you it is i'm never
going to be the first time penis is a
vessel for science for the good of men
everywhere
[Laughter]
i don't i don't plan on doing that much
more i think
uh
yeah i don't want to be like the like
the dick guy
especially i don't want to be the small
dick guy but i don't want to i don't
want to be known for for crazy biohacks
crazy sexual biohacks i mean
honestly uh going forward in life i
think that there are things that bring
you a lot more meaning
and happiness than than necessarily
trying to uh trying to grasp ads and
even even life and health at all costs
right and again coming full circle
to some of these blue zones
they're incredibly happy because they
have their ikigai
the the reason for getting out of bed in
the morning it's the japanese terms the
reason for living right a purpose they
have a purpose i think everyone should
be able to very clearly and succinctly
name their purpose in life
just in a single sentence when you're
under stress when you know the bullets
are flying at you you need to be able to
say you know what my purpose in life is
to empower people to live a more
adventurous joyful and fulfilling life
that's really cool i ben greenfield live
to empower people to live a more
adventurous joyful and fulfilling life
and that gets me out of bed in the
morning
surrounding yourself with with positive
relationships we prioritize family
dinner every night we gather around we
share our gratitude journals and we play
table topics and we laugh and we go
upstairs and i play the boys you know
songs on the guitar and we we sing and
we when we read and we say a prayer we
go to bed and we're all together as a
family
knowing your neighbor's name and being
able to be there for your neighbor and
the people in your local community there
are all these things that
when we tend to myopically focus on
ourselves and
stem cell injections and peptides and
charms and mitochondria and all these
things they're good and i think it's
good like you like the reason that you
want to live longer or even live forever
is not so you can be the person who who
has the most car and makes the most
money and [__] the most and has the
most amazing adventurous life right the
reason that i think you should be trying
to live a long time and feel really good
doing it is so that you are as equipped
as you possibly can be to best fulfill
your purpose in life to best be able to
take the unique skill sets that you were
born with and if i can if i can help
people to go on adventures and and have
happiness and feel fulfilled until i'm
150 instead of until i'm 70 and if
especially after i'm 70 i'm not
relegated to a wheelchair but i'm doing
this and i'm up on stages when i'm 120
giving my talks and inspiring people
that's the reason that you want to live
a long time it's not just so you can so
you can sit at home watching netflix and
counting your gold bars right so
so
i think that all this stuff needs to be
framed in that mindset and if that's the
reason that you're going out and doing
all this fringe [__] and biohacking and
spending all the money and reading all
the books as long as you have that in
the back of your mind that ultimately
it's all so that you can make this world
a better place and leave this world a
better place and there's going to be
it sounds it sounds like a horribly
pessimistic way to view things but
you want as many people crying at your
funeral as possible right and if there's
a lot of people crying at your funeral
then then you've probably done a pretty
good job with that long life that you've
strived for and hopefully been given
that's a damn good answer man
before i ask my last question tell these
guys where they can find you online i
have a blog
i have a podcast where you can find all
my books and everything that's at
benggreenfieldfitness.com
uh and then i have a company called keon
where uh it's it's my my playground to
develop supplements and you know i wrote
a gratitude journal that i have there
and all my my books are over there and
anytime i discover a
cool new molecule or herb or something i
want to create a supplement formulation
over
over there i'd do it i've got coffee and
all sorts of stuff so i would say my
company keon or my website at
benggreenfieldfitness.com are two good
places i love that yeah all right my
last question what's one change that
people can make that would have the
biggest impact on their health oh okay
so we said we said going outside
barefoot
and uh we said sunshine and water and
minerals i take a cold shower at the
beginning of the day and at the end of
the day the beginning of the day gets
the nitric oxide going
about two minutes yeah yeah i get bored
once i go past two minutes but i kind of
turn around i get the the underarms
where your vagus nerve travels and the
throat and the back of the neck and the
face it's very important to get that wet
so i do kind of a full body little cold
shower at the beginning of the day which
gives you nitric oxide and increases the
tone of your vagus nerve uh increases
cellular resilience it deactivates the
sympathetic nervous system once you're
able to breathe your way through that
stress and kind of suppress the
mammalian dive reflex right that sharp
intake of breath when you get in the
cold you want to train yourself to just
be like a monk you get in there and man
when you pair that with the grounding
and earthing sunlight water and minerals
and you just do those five things and i
bet if we did that that we would reduce
the whatever it is that the 900 plus
billion dollar pharmaceutical industry
we'd at least make a dent in that if
everybody started doing just those few
things
i love that awesome ben thank you so
much for being on show man thanks tom
really fantastic thanks all right guys
this is somebody who i think
is at the absolute cutting edge of
all health fitness all of it and is able
to make it accessible to people and like
he was talking about there at the end
with
really finding your purpose and
connecting to why you're doing all this
stuff i think it's really interesting
and the fact that he writes fantasy
fiction gives you an end to the humanity
that's behind everything that he does
which is why i find him so interesting
um there are a few people that really
make me interested in the juxtaposition
of the science of all this with the
spirituality of it
one thing that we didn't talk about
which would be actually really
fascinating and i think you can feel
sort of undergirding his work is that he
obviously being religious which i am not
but seeing people who are deeply
religious and that they have that
connection
it adds a layer to their work which i
find really really interesting and
you'll see it across everything that he
does i think that he's really sincere
about understanding
human biomechanics so even looking at
some of the things that he's doing from
what he's putting out from a nutrition
and supplement perspective i think is
really interesting and i highly
encourage you guys to look at that and i
think the way there at the end that he
really broke down the five simple things
that you could be doing that would have
a massive impact on your health
i think that
your lives would be revolutionized by
making those changes there's certainly
things that he said that i'm going to
implement into my daily life um so i
encourage you guys not just to look into
what he's doing but to really experiment
and see if it works for yourself
i think that you'll see some pretty
extraordinary changes and just dive in
his world it is so much bigger than what
we touched on today the number of topics
that he can go into um just even like
the wild plants which is um a whole
massive topic unto itself he's written
pretty profoundly about so check all of
that stuff out all right if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe until next
time my friends be legendary take care
my man thank you so much thank you guys
so much for watching and being a part of
this community if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit and unlocking
your full potential
you